add documentation regarding optional packages (#103)
pyansys/dev-guide: doc/source/guidelines/optional_packages.rst

.. _optional_packages:

Handling Optional Packages
==========================

The ``setuptools``, ``flit``, and ``poetry`` build systems all allow you to
declare dependencies that only get installed under specific circumstances. This
makes it convenient to declare dependencies for ancillary functions such as

> "plotting", "tests", or "docs". This allows you to pragmatically integrate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"plotting", "tests", or "docs". You can pragmatically integrate
```

> "plotting", "tests", or "docs". This allows you to pragmatically integrate
> optional dependencies which can be installed as optional requirements rather
> than individual packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"plotting", "tests", or "docs". You can pragmatically integrate
dependencies that can be installed as optional requirements rather
than individual packages.
```

Reviewer: @akaszynski Did you mean "pragmatically integrate" or "programmatically integrate"?

Author: programmatically

I edited your comment to reflect that. Thanks for pointing that out.

> You may want to have optional packages for your pyansys library for a variety

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may want to have optional packages for your PyAnsys library for a variety
```

of reasons, including:

- **Not all users will want to use the feature.** - For example, you might want

>   to make the usage of `matplotlib <https://matplotlib.org/`_ or `pyvista

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to make the usage of `matplotlib <https://matplotlib.org/>`_ or `pyvista
```

> - **Not all users will want to use the feature.** - For example, you might want
>   to make the usage of `matplotlib <https://matplotlib.org/`_ or `pyvista
>   <https://docs.pyvista.org/>`_ if you expect your pyansys library to be used
>   primarily for headless scripting rather than visualization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Not all users will want to use the feature.** - For example, you might want
  to make the usage of `matplotlib <https://matplotlib.org/`_ or `pyvista
  <https://docs.pyvista.org/>`_ optional if you expect your PyAnsys library to be used
  primarily for headless scripting rather than visualization.
```

- **Not all users can install the optional package.** - For certain less popular
  or obscure environments, some binary wheels may not be available or

>   compatible with the user's environment. For example, if they're using CentOS
>   6.9 and need a ``manylinux1`` but the package only supports ``manylinux2014``
>   (CentOS 7+) or newer, their environment wouldn't be able to run the pyansys
>   library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  compatible with the user's environment. For example, if a user of CentOS
  6.9 needs to have ``manylinux1`` but the package only supports ``manylinux2014``
  (CentOS 7+) or newer, the user's environment wouldn't be able to run the PyAnsys
  library.
```

- **Reducing Dependency Bloat** - Removing the package as a "required"

>   dependency reduces the number of packages installed at install-time, speeding
>   up the install and reducing the possibility of dependency conflicts. The
>   trade-off here is any user who wishes to access features which require the
>   optional package will have to install it piecemeal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  dependency reduces the number of packages installed at installation -time,
  speeding up the install and reducing the possibility of dependency conflicts. The
  trade-off here is any user who wants to access features that require the
  optional package will have to install it piecemeal.
```

> If you choose to implement optional packages for your pyansys library, here are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you choose to implement optional packages for your PyAnsys library, here are
```

some helpful best-practices to follow.

Implementing Optional Packages in the Build System
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Here's how to implement and use optional requirements for the three most

> popular build systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
popular build systems:
```

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: poetry

      .. code-block::

>          [tool.poetry.extras]

Reviewer 2: AFAIK this is insufficient; ``poetry`` **additionally** needs the dependency to be declared in the ``[tool.poetry.dependencies]`` section, e.g.

```toml
matplotlib = {version = "^3.5", optional = true}
```

         all = [
             "matplotlib",
             "pyvista",
             "pyside",
         ]
         plotting = [
             "matplotlib",
             "pyvista",
         ]
         qt = [
             "pyside",
         ]

         Install ``package-name`` with the optional ``qt`` packages with:

         .. code-block::

            poetry install --extras "plotting qt"

   .. tab:: flit

      .. code-block::

         [project.optional-dependencies]
         all = [
             "matplotlib",
             "pyvista",
             "pyside",
         ]
         plotting = [
             "matplotlib",
             "pyvista",
         ]
         qt = [
             "pyside",
         ]

         Install ``package-name`` with the optional ``qt`` packages with:

         .. code-block::

            pip install package-name --extras=all

   .. tab:: setuptools

      .. code-block:: python

         from setuptools import setup

         setup(
             ...
             extras_require={
                'all': ['matplotlib', 'pyvista', 'pyside'],
                'plotting': ['matplotlib', 'pyvista'],

>                  'qt': ['pyside'],

Author: ```suggestion
                'qt': ['pyside'],
```

             },
             ...
         )

         Install ``package-name`` with the optional ``qt`` packages with:

         .. code-block::

            pip install package-name[qt]

Implementing Optional Libraries in Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
One of the best ways to implement an optional dependency is to execute a "lazy
import" at runtime for the feature in question. For example, if your library
has an optional dependency on ``matplotlib``, you can implement it with:

.. code:: python

   def plot(x, y):
       """Plot two numpy arrays.

       Parameters
       ----------
       x : numpy.ndarray
           Numpy array sized (n, ).
       y : numpy.ndarray
           Numpy array sized (n, ).

       Notes
       -----
       This function requires ``matplotlib``.

       """
       try:
           import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
       except ModuleNotFoundError:  # pragma: no cover
           raise ModuleNotFoundError(

>                "Please install matplotlib to use this feature with:\n\n"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
               "To use this feature, install Matplotlib with:\n\n"
```

Reviewer: I don't think you can use double back ticks in line 141 but tagging within this topic varies a bit.

               "pip install matplotlib"
           )
       plt.plot(x, y)

> Note that the import statement is within the method and not at the module
> level. Normally this is a bad practice as this can cause runtime errors, but
> for optional features where the user isn't expected to have the library
> installed, this is one of the best ways of handling it. Otherwise, the pyansys
> library might fail to import as the optional package might not be installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the ``import`` statement is within the method and not at the module
level. Normally this is a bad practice because it can cause runtime errors. However,
for optional features where the user isn't expected to have the library
installed, this is one of the best ways of handling it. Otherwise, the PyAnsys
library might fail to import because the optional package might not be installed.
```

> Also note how this code snippet adds a helpful note `ModuleNotFoundError
> <https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#ModuleNotFoundError`_ rather
> than simply letting the error to be raised. This lets the user know that this
> error is expected as the feature relies on an optional dependency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also note how this code snippet adds a helpful `ModuleNotFoundError
<https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#ModuleNotFoundError`_ rather
than simply allowing the error to be raised. This lets the user know that this
error is expected because the feature relies on an optional dependency.
```

If you have many methods that rely on an optional feature, you can implement a
`decorator <https://realpython.com/primer-on-python-decorators/>`_ to make it
easier to add these lazy imports and helpful error messages. For example:

.. code:: python

   from functools import wraps
   import importlib
   import warnings

   def requires_package(package_name, raise_error=False):
       """
       Check if a package is installed by importing it.

       Parameters
       ----------
       package_name : str
           Name of the package.
       raise_error : bool, optional

>            Raise a ``ModuleNotFoundError`` is the package is not installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           Raise ``ModuleNotFoundError`` if the package is not installed. The default
           is ``False``.
```

       Raises
       ------
       ModuleNotFoundError

>            Raise when a package is not installed and ``raise_error`` is True.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           Raise when a package is not installed and ``raise_error=True`.
```

       """

       def decorator(function):
           @wraps(function)
           def wrapper(self, *args, **kwargs):

               try:
                   importlib.import_module(package_name)
                   return function(self, *args, **kwargs)

               except ModuleNotFoundError:
                   msg = (
                       f"To use the method '{function.__name__}', "
                       f"the package '{package_name}' is required.\n"

>                        f"Please try to install '{package_name}' with:\n"

Author: ```suggestion
                       f"Install '{package_name}' with:\n"
```

                       f"pip install {package_name.replace('.','-') if 'ansys' in package_name else package_name}"
                   )

                   if raise_error:
                       raise ModuleNotFoundError(msg)
                   else:
                       warnings.warn(msg)
                       return

           return wrapper

       return decorator

> Which is used within a class method with:

Reviewer: The decorator is used with a class method with:

> Which is used within a class method with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You use the decorator within a class method with:
```

Reviewer: We really need to use a full sentence here rather than a fragment.

.. code:: python

    class MyClass:

        def __init__(self, sz):
            self._a = np.arange(sz)
            self._b = np.arange(sz)

        @requires_package('emoo')
        def plot(self):
            """Plot the internal arrays ``_a`` and ``_b``.

            Notes
            -----
            This method requires ``matplotlib``.

            """
            import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
            plt.plot(self._a, self._b)

In practice, if the user does not have ``matplotlib`` installed, this is the

> behavior they would expect:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
behavior that the user would expect:
```

.. code:: python

   >>> my_inst = MyClass(10)
   >>> my_inst.plot()
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>

   ModuleNotFoundError: To use the method 'plot', the package 'matplotlib' is required.

>    Please try to install 'matplotlib' with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Try to install 'matplotlib' with:
```

  primarily for headless scripting rather than visualization.
- **Not all users can install the optional package.** - For certain less popular
  or obscure environments, some binary wheels may not be available or
  compatible with the user's environment. For example, if a user of CentOS
  6.9 needs to have ``manylinux1`` but the package only supports ``manylinux2014``
  (CentOS 7+) or newer, the user's environment wouldn't be able to run the PyAnsys
  library.
- **Reducing Dependency Bloat** - Removing the package as a "required"
  dependency reduces the number of packages installed at installation -time,
  speeding up the install and reducing the possibility of dependency conflicts. The
  trade-off here is any user who wants to access features that require the
  optional package will have to install it piecemeal.

If you choose to implement optional packages for your PyAnsys library, here are
some helpful best-practices to follow.

Implementing Optional Packages in the Build System
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Here's how to implement and use optional requirements for the three most
popular build systems:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: poetry

      .. code-block::

> 

Author: ```suggestion
         ...
         [tool.poetry.dependencies]
         matplotlib = {version = "^3.5", optional = true}
         pyvista = {version = "^0.32", optional = true}
         pyside = {version = "^1.2", optional = true}
         ...

```

  primarily for headless scripting rather than visualization.
- **Not all users can install the optional package.** - For certain less popular
  or obscure environments, some binary wheels may not be available or
  compatible with the user's environment. For example, if a user of CentOS
  6.9 needs to have ``manylinux1`` but the package only supports ``manylinux2014``
  (CentOS 7+) or newer, the user's environment wouldn't be able to run the PyAnsys
  library.
- **Reducing Dependency Bloat** - Removing the package as a "required"
  dependency reduces the number of packages installed at installation -time,
  speeding up the install and reducing the possibility of dependency conflicts. The
  trade-off here is any user who wants to access features that require the
  optional package will have to install it piecemeal.

If you choose to implement optional packages for your PyAnsys library, here are
some helpful best-practices to follow.

Implementing Optional Packages in the Build System
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Here's how to implement and use optional requirements for the three most
popular build systems:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: poetry

>       .. code-block::
>          ...

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      .. code-block::

         ...
```

declare dependencies that only get installed under specific circumstances. This
makes it convenient to declare dependencies for ancillary functions such as
"plotting", "tests", or "docs". You can programmatically integrate
dependencies that can be installed as optional requirements rather
than individual packages.

You may want to have optional packages for your PyAnsys library for a variety
of reasons, including:

- **Not all users will want to use the feature.** - For example, you might want
  to make using `matplotlib <https://matplotlib.org/>`_ or `pyvista
  <https://docs.pyvista.org/>`_ optional if you expect your PyAnsys library is to be used
  primarily for headless scripting rather than visualization.
- **Not all users can install the optional package.** - For certain less popular
  or obscure environments, some binary wheels may not be available or
  compatible with the user's environment. For example, if a user of CentOS
  6.9 needs to have ``manylinux1`` but the package only supports ``manylinux2014``
  (CentOS 7+) or newer, the user's environment wouldn't be able to run the PyAnsys
  library.
- **Reducing Dependency Bloat** - Removing the package as a "required"

>   dependency reduces the number of packages installed at installation -time,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  dependency reduces the number of packages to install at installation time,
```

Reviewer 4: Applied locally.

>   speeding up the install and reducing the possibility of dependency conflicts. The

Reviewer 4: Applied locally.

  trade-off here is any user who wants to access features that require the
  optional package will have to install it piecemeal.

If you choose to implement optional packages for your PyAnsys library, here are

> some helpful best-practices to follow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
some helpful best practices to follow.
```

Reviewer 4: Applied locally.

> some helpful best-practices to follow.

Reviewer 4: Solved locally.

has an optional dependency on ``matplotlib``, you can implement it with:

.. code:: python

   def plot(x, y):
       """Plot two numpy arrays.

       Parameters
       ----------
       x : numpy.ndarray
           Numpy array sized (n, ).
       y : numpy.ndarray
           Numpy array sized (n, ).

       Notes
       -----
       This function requires ``matplotlib``.

       """
       try:
           import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
       except ModuleNotFoundError:  # pragma: no cover
           raise ModuleNotFoundError(
               "To use this feature, install 'matplotlib' with:\n\n"
               "pip install matplotlib"
           )
       plt.plot(x, y)

Note that the ``import`` statement is within the method and not at the module
level. Normally this is a bad practice because it can cause runtime errors. However,
for optional features where the user isn't expected to have the library
installed, this is one of the best ways of handling it. Otherwise, the PyAnsys
library might fail to import because the optional package might not be installed.

Also note how this code snippet adds a helpful `ModuleNotFoundError

> <https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#ModuleNotFoundError`_ rather

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#ModuleNotFoundError/>`_ rather
```
